OVERVIEW

This package contains code implementing the experimental setup described
in the article

Toward more realistic drug-target interaction predictions.
Pahikkala T, Airola A, Pietilä S, Shakyawar S, Szwajda A, Tang J, Aittokallio T.
Brief Bioinform. 2015 Mar;16(2):325-37. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbu010

The Kronecker RLS algorithm is from the RLScore software library at
https://github.com/aatapa/RLScore

The algorithm is described in the article:

Efficient regularized least-squares algorithms for conditional ranking on relational data
T Pahikkala, A Airola, M Stock, B De Baets, W Waegeman
Machine learning 2013 93 (2-3), 321-356

Please cite the aforementioned works, if using this software in your own research.

The software implements nested cross-validation in the settings S1-S4. In settings
S1-S3 an outer five-fold, and inner four-fold cross-validation is used, while in S4
an outer 3x3 and an inner 2x2 cross-validation are used. The code supports both binary
(-1, +1) and real-valued labels, and you can supply your own data and performance measure.

Examples using both real-valued and binary output versions of the Davis and Metz data,
with both the concordance index (equivalent to area under ROC curve for binary labels)
and area under precision-recall curve (AUPR) are provided. You can modify the code by
defining your own data files, and if needed, your own performance measure.

The code is research code provided as is, bug reports are welcome. Due to differences
caused by factors such as randomization of the folds, slight changes in how the missing
data is imputated etc. the code will not exactly produce the same results as in the paper:
"Toward more realistic drug-target interaction predictions", but the results
should still fairly closely follow the reported results.

INSTALLATION

Requirements:
Python 2.7x (may work with earlier versions, not tested)
NumPy 
C-compiler

run "python setup.py"

Installation has been tested to work on recent Ubuntu Linux distributions, for
installation on Windows you may need to check how to set up a C-compiler
(e.g. Visual C++, MinGW) together with the Python distutils tools.

Additionally, if using the AUPR-performance measure, you need to download the
auc.jar package to the same folder as the rest of the code from

http://mark.goadrich.com/programs/AUC/

and have a working Java runtime environment installed. The python wrapper implemented
in the function get_aupr(Y, P) will call this implementation. The code is not safe
for running multiple instances of it at the same time, as these will overwrite the
temp-files created by other run.

RUNNING THE EXPERIMENTS

Example codes for running Davis and Metz data, both for binarized and original real-valued
outputs, as well as both cindex and AUPR are provided in the python script. Uncomment the
experiment you want to run in the main-function of the script and run it with:

python kronecker_experiments.py

USING YOUR OWN DATA

use the davis and metz functions as examples how to run experiments on your own data.

Experiments are run by executing:

experiment(XD, XT, Y, perfmeasure, foldcount=5)

Input:
XD: drugs x drug_features numpy array
XT: targets x target_features numpy array

The features can be any real values describing the drugs/targets, also similarities with
other durgs or targets. 

Y
drugs x targets numpy array of drug-target interactions

Either real-values describing the strength of the interaction, or binary {-1, +1} = {INTERACTS / NOT}.
nan (=not a number)-values can be used if for some pairs this is unkown, nan-values are ignored
both in training and testing (see Metz-data for example of data with many nan-values).

perfmeasure:
either cindex or get_aupr

Note that cindex works for both binary and real-valued outputs, while AUPR works only for binary classification.

If instead of the supplied cindex and AUPR measures you want to use your own performance measure function,
simply write a function like

def my_function(list_of_true_outputs, list_of_predicted_outputs):
    value = number describing how well true_outputs match predicted_outputs (the bigger the better)
    return value

and pass it as argument.

folds:
Default 5-fold for settings 1-3, but you can use a different number of folds too. The code will
execute outer (performance measurement) n-fold and inner n-1 fold (selection of regularization
parameter) cross-validation.


